# Design of a RISC-V-lite processor
The main purpose of this lab was to design in VHDL a RISC-V-lite processor with 5 pipeline stages where the instructions supported by this processor are a subset of the whole RV32I which has a 32-bit fixed-width instruction set. 
In particular, this subset is defined by the instructions required to execute the "minv" application given as specification.

## Important notes
This is a team project for the course of Integrated System Architecture held in the Electronic Engineering Master's degree program of Politecnico di Torino. The project was not originally developed making use of GitHub, it has been uploaded by myself subsequently. For a better understanding of the code, the design flow and the conclusions the reader can have a look to the RISCV.pdf report. Many thanks to my colleagues Othman and Roberto for their contribution to this project.

## The "minv-project" directory
In "minv-project" folder there are files on the compilation and generation of the source code. In practice the application that must run on the developed RISC-V processor is made of 3 files: "main.c", "minv.h" and "minv.c". This code, given an array of numbers makes the absolute value of them and find the maximum among them.
The process to obtain the wanted instructions is now described. The first step is to rely on a RISC-V version of gcc ("riscv32-unknown-elf-gcc") to generate the executable file from the main application; to do this, the compiler requires information about the memory organization and a preamble to initialize registers. The registers initialization is performed by the "crt0.s" file that defines the start symbol which represents the address of the first instruction to execute. The information about the memory organization is performed by the linked script: a file named "riscV32-isa.ld" which sets the first address at 0x00400000 for the instruction ROM memory, and 0x10010000 for the data RAM. It sets also the global pointer to 0x100008000, the stack pointer to 0x7fffeffc and assigns each segment of the program to the correct memory type.
After generating the executable with the RISC-V version of gcc, we relied on the disassembler to convert the executable file into a text file. In particular, from the executable file it was necessary to extract both the sequence of instructions with the corresponding address and the data. The obtained files from this procedure are the main.hex and data.hex.
The final goal with the data and instructions obtained by compiling the application is to generate an assembly file ready to be simulated with the RISC-V simulator named RARS. To do this 2 codes (named "extract code.sh" and "extract data.sh") have been utilized to extract the binary executable in hexadecimal format from the "main.hex" file and the data from the "data.hex" one. The resulting files are the "main.asm" and the "data.txt".
From these last two files, the final "program.asm file", which was used for the simulation in RARS, has been obtained by taking these two files and apply some minor editing.
The program RARS simulates the execution of these instructions, updating the register file and data memory at every iteration, representing a reference for how the structures in the RISC-V architecture have to behave for every instruction.

## The "RTL" directory
This directory contains all the VHDL files used to design the structure of the RISC-V processor. The architecture has been designed in order to run the instructions that are needed for the running of the "minv" application. Basically it is based on the typical RISC-V pipelined architecture with 5 pipeline stages (IF, ID, EX, MEM, WB) and then more features have been added such as units for managing the hazards: a forwarding unit block and an hazard detection unit for dealing with data hazards and a flush signal for managing the control hazards.
Morover in this folder there are scripts for running automatically the Questasim simulation for comparing the results with the ones obtained through the RARS simulator.
The design has been also syntetized with Synopsys Design compiler and timing and area reports are available.
In the RTL directory one can notice the presence of a "crypt" and a "no_crypt" folder. In particular, the last one contains the RTL design in VHDL of the basic structure as described until now while the first folder contains the same architecture but with the addition of a "decryption unit" that is necessary if we encrypt the instruction.
For more details the reader can consult the pdf report.
